(upbeat music)
All right, now we're going
to start building a gallery.
So this is gonna be kind of an interesting one
because we're gonna build it pretty standard
and then we're gonna come back and refactor it
for prototypes, once we understand what those are.
And then we're gonna come back a third time
and refactor that for classes.
And I think that should give you a good sort of idea
about why do we need prototypes and what are classes.
So this is an interesting one right off the bat
because I want the ability to use
this JavaScript many times over.
A lot of the JavaScript we've written so far
just assumes that things are on the page
and assumes that there's only ever one of them.
But what if we wanna build this gallery,
well let me show you it real quick,
is if you click on it, it'll open it up.
You can click next.
If I hit the escape key, it will go.
If you can tap through them,
hit your enter key, it will open them up for you.
I can use my arrow keys.
Like a full featured gallery and that's great and all
but if I have a secondary gallery like down here
it also should work.
I should be able to reuse the same code
for multiple galleries and keep those things separate.
So that's what we're gonna do in this video
is build this gallery from the ground up
with the ability to reuse it multiple times.
You've probably already seen me using
capital G gallery here, and I'm gonna explain
what that is and why that all is.
So let's get into it, I am in gallery.js.
There is a gallery demo, there will be a gallery-finish.
That will be the exact code that we write in this video.
So, the first thing that we need to do
is we need to create a closure.
Now we learn like, I don't know,
maybe 30 or 40 videos ago that a closure is
the ability to create a function,
and that function has scope.
So if we make a function here called gallery
and that takes in a gallery argument,
this function here will have scope.
Now if we make functions inside of here
like we make a function called show next image,
and we create variables inside of here
like const buttons is equal to,
I don't know why I'm commenting this,
gallery.querySelectorall button,
if we look for buttons inside of the gallery
that gets passed in, and inside of this function,
we reference these variables, we have created a closure.
Meaning that this function
will run gallery when we create it
and this function will exist for things like click handlers
and the variables that have been created in between
these two functions will still be accessible
even after this function is done running,
even after that function has closed over.
That's why they call it a closure.
So we are going to use that concept
to allow us to create scope for each of these galleries
so that they don't interfere with each other
but they can reuse the same code.
So I'm gonna back this up, I'm not actually gonna write
any of that but we're gonna start with this gallery here.
Now, the idea, my idea with this function here
in this gallery is that at the very end, we've created
almost like a plug in and we can go ahead
and use it on the page.
So we could do something like const gallery1
is equal to, and we can make a new gallery,
just capital G Gallery and this will soon be having a new
keyword in front of it, but or now, we don't need that,
we'll understand why it is.
And then if we go to the index.html,
and if we go to the index.html that is on this gallery,
you'll see we have gallery one and we have
a secondary gallery in there.
So we're going to pass it, reference to the gallery we want.
So we'll say document.queryselector.gallery1
and then just go ahead and duplicate
that thing over for gallery2.
We're gonna run this right from the start
with two different galleries so that we know
every line of code that we're writing
is safe for reuse over time.
Now, first thing we wanna do is, when this function runs,
let's just console log the gallery,
and I'm gonna open up my index HTML,
open that up in the browser and in our dev tools,
we should see and we go gallery1 and gallery2.
One kind of helpful thing for this is
very first line, we can say, if there is no gallery
passed in, we can throw a new error that says,
No Gallery Found.
And by throwing an error like this, what will happen
is if we pass in something that doesn't exist,
it would just show an error in our console
and stop that code from running,
it will break on the page.
If we wanted to gracefully degrade,
you can simply just return, it's removing the return,
(mumbles) but imagine you're returning there
and what that will do is it will just break without
throwing any errors in your console,
depends on what you wanted to do.
In our case, we're just going to use throw new error
and that will give an error in our console.
Then, what we need to do is select
the whole bunch of images.
So previously, I had been selecting everything
at the top of the file.
In our case, since we need to select these things
for each of our instances, we're gonna be selecting it
inside of this function because remember,
the function is scoped to only this function
and we are operating and making these variables are
that live only inside this function.
In that way, the gallery1 and gallery2
will never clash with each other.
So let's select the elements we need.
So, first thing we need is a list of all of the images.
So, make images and we'll say array.from,
because we're gonna need to loop over them in the feature.
And instead of saying document.querySelector here,
we need, again, remember, we always need to scope
everything to the actual gallery
that was passed in to the selector.
So we're going to use the gallery selector here
and say .querySelector and we're gonna look
for images that live inside of it.
If we console log images, you just see,
oh, it's empty, okay.
So, I don't know what the problem is, let's debug.
Console log our gallery.
The gallery is showing up.
And if we look inside of that, we have images,
maybe, oh, querySelectorAll.
That's why.
Not .querySelector because we want all of the images.
There we go.
So for each gallery, I am getting nine images back.
Okay now, good.
Next thing that we need is our modal, our previous
and our next buttons so if we look at this index.html,
another thing that I've already done and gone
is scaffold it out, the HTML for showing
a modal that pops up.
I've just put some test stuff in there just so that
when I was styling it, I could quickly style it
with some test stuff in here.
You could totally just leave this out,
I'll leave it in there just so that you can see
what the idea markup of creating this thing will be.
So we have a figure with an image,
a figcaption H2, a paragraph.
And what will happen is that we're going to show this thing
when somebody pops that open and swap out all of the,
with the text that is associated with each of our images.
So let's go ahead and select those.
We'll say const modal, we go to document.querySelector
and we are going to grab the thing with the class or modal.
In this case, I am using document because the markup
for this will be shared between the two
because it's only possible to have one modal open
at a time, so that's why we do that like that.
And then, we want the previous button.
And we can look inside the modal that we have.
querySelector look for .prev and it will swap that
second one out with the next.
So now, for the rest of this thing,
we're just gonna be chunking up all of the functionality
into a bunch of little functions.
We're gonna break into a function.
I'll show the image, open the modal, close the modal,
listen for all of the clicks in keyboard,
things that we're looking for, adding and removing event.
There's actually quite a lot going on here
and I think this is a really good example
of how you can take a complex JavaScript app
and make it somewhat simple by breaking it
into smaller, little functions.
So, let's probably start with the showing of the image.
So when somebody clicks on one of these images,
we need to update that modal with the associated images
as well as pop open that modal.
So let's start with the first function
and we'll call that showImage
and that's going to take in an image element
so I'm gonna call that el,
it's gonna get passed reference to just an image tag
that is somewhere on the page.
And here, we'll just say if there's no el, then,
console.info, no image to show.
And then it will return.
You'll notice that I'm starting to do this
in these ones right here and the reason why I'm doing that
is because sometimes, these functions can get run
for whatever reason, if something's broken, or whatever,
and having these little safety checks
can stop a broken application on your page.
Otherwise, what we need to do is update
the modal with this info.
So let's just console that log, the element
that got passed in and then start hooking up
some of our clicks and what not.
So, what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna take our images array
and we've selected that right here
when we've taken the gallery querySelector
for all the images.
And I'm going to loop over each of them.
And for each image that we have, I'm going to
add an event listener.
So image.addEventListener.
We're going to listen for the click event.
And when that happens, we will run a callback function.
Now, I'm nesting it inside of here,
we could certainly create a function here
called handleImageClick, we should do that,
let's do that and then we'll refactor it.
And that takes in then event.
And we'll go here and pass on the handleImageClick.
Now, inside of this handleImageClick,
we simply just need to pass the image tag
or whatever image you have to this show image.
So showImage and then how do we reference
the image that was clicked?
On the event .currentTarget.
All right, now, this is getting to be
a lot of different functions.
So, let's check if it works and then we refactor that out
just to another error function.
So you see what's happening
is when I now click on one of these images here,
we get the actual image that is on the page.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna refactor this one here
instead of having handleImageClick,
I'm just going to get the event.
And I'm going to pass the event.current
target to show image.
And I name this one Event, this one e,
I change this to e, and now we can get rid of
this function right here.
And we will double check that it still works.
Okay, good.
So now, we're back into the showImage here
and when somebody clicks it,
there's a couple of things that need to happen.
We need to update the source of our modal,
if we take at a look of this thing here,
we've got this image, we need to update that,
we need to update this h2 and we need
to update the paragraphs text.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So we'll say modal.querySelector
we'll search for the image and we'll set the source
of the found image to be the l.src.
So, let's take a look at our elements panel here.
And we'll open up our modal inner,
open up the figure and it says get kith-hoodie,
but now if I click on the backpack, it updates it to,
I'm not using a server here so it updates it
to this file, really long.
If you're using parcel, those will be a little bit cleaner.
But it is updating the image source.
Now, we can go ahead and, let's just duplicate that lines,
switch out the selector to be the h2
and set the text content property to be
the element.title, why?
Because if you look at the images that I have here,
we have a couple of things on here
and one of them is a title.
So, we can go ahead and take the title from the image.
And then we'll duplicate that again and grab the paragraph.
We'll say figure space p, just in case there's any other
paragraphs in that modal.
And in this case, I've went with a data-description
property which is a custom property I've made up
under the data attribute and we need to pull that out.
So how do we get that?
Well it's el.dataset.description.
Finally, what we wanna do is we need to keep track
of want the currently open image is.
So I'm going to go to the top, right underneath
where we declared it, our next button.
And say let current image and that's it
and then we'll go down here and say
the current image is equal to the element.
And that will make sense as to why we need that
when we start getting into the buttons of previous and next.
So, I think we should be able to open up this figcaption now
and we click on these, you see that they are
being swapped out with the value that we have.
It looks like my demo text is the same for each of them
but the first time around, you'll see
that the h2 in the paragraph and the image are all updating.
Good, so next, what we need to do is write some code
that actually open up that modal
'cause you can only see it showing up here.
Let's actually open it up to the user,
and for that, we will write another function.
I'll do it above here.
Function called openModal.
And let's just console.info opening modal.
And we'll run that right here.
And there's a few things we need to do.
We need to first check if then modal is already open
and the reason why need to do that
'cause I've got some animations
that will animate it in and out.
And we don't want to be triggering those animations
if the modal is already open for whatever reason.
So if a modal.matches .open, what this will do
is it will take our modal and see if it matches
a CSS selector or not and the way that we're gonna tell
if the modal is open or not is by a CSS class that is open.
And then we'll console.info modal already open.
And then use return and that will stop
the function from running.
Otherwise, if it's not open, we take our modal
and we add a class of open.
Let's try it.
Whoo, I like it.
There's no closing, none of these buttons work,
escape doesn't work, click outside doesn't work
but if I refresh it, it now will slide down from the top
and change that value for us.
So why does that work?
Well, if you look at the gallery.css,
when we go down to our modal,
you'll see that our modal, when it has a class of open
has an opacity of one and a pointer-events of all
and a modal by default will have an opacity of zero
and a pointer-events of none and what that would do is,
opacity zero will hide it from the user.
I'm gonna make that a one, you'll see that it is there
on page load, but then, you can still click
through that modal and by putting a pointer-events none,
that essentially ignores all clicks to it.
And then we have our modal inner, which, by default,
will be negative 100 view port heights off the page.
So if I take that off and to put opacity one on this,
you see on page load, it will already be there.
But a negative 100 view port will put it off the screen
and then when there is a open property on the parent,
the inner gets a translate Y of zero
and that will animate itself on in.
So we'll bring this back to what we had, zero.
There we go.
It's working just fine for us.
Next, we'll make a function to close the modal
so function closeModal.
And what do you think we'll do there?
Is we'll just take the modal and remove the class of open.
And like before we even do that, let me just show you.
We have our modal rate here.
Part is to manually take off this class.
It just closes itself.
And I can go ahead and click on it again
and it will open it up for us.
So that's essentially what a closeModal
is going to be doing.
We also will open a little to do add event listeners
for clicks and keyboard.
We'll do that in just a little bit.
Now, let's look up.
First one, what I wanna do is I want, if I click
outside of this modal, I wanna be able to
run that closeModal function.
So, how would I do that?
Well, if you kinda look at it, if somebody clicks
on this div right here, but not the inner div.
So if anyone clicks on a div but not inside the modal inner,
like if you're clicking here, I don't want it to close
but if you click outside of that,
then I do want it to close.
So, what we'll do is we make a new function
and we'll call that a handle clickOutside
that takes in an event.
And then we can go to where we do our event listeners.
Maybe we can put a little comment here.
These are our event listeners.
We say modal.addEventListener listen for a click
and we'll give it the handClickOutside.
And what we'll say inside of here, so we'll say if
the e.target is equal to e.currentTarget,
then, closeModal.
So, why are we doing this?
Well, if the thing they actually clicked
and the thing that you're listening for the click on,
are the same thing, then it means that the user
has clicked on the actual modal div
and not the modal inner, not this button,
not this figure, not this other button,
not anything inside of it.
So that's when we're checking if the thing
that they actually clicked is the exact same thing
as what we are listening for, then,
we're going to go ahead and close it.
So let's try it.
It doesn't work.
Refresh it.
Oh, I forgot to refresh it, there you go.
So now the clicking outside works.
And let's go ahead and wire up the escape key
on our keyboard as well 'cause that's when also
what I reach for when a modal opens up.
So, we'll make another function here called handleKeyUp.
And we get the event and in here, we'll say
if the event.key is equal to escape, demo, closeModal.
Here's a use good case for a block list if statement
because it's a nice, clean one-liner.
Because of the way that keyUp works, it will fire
for any key, so we're actually going to be
throwing it a bunch of logic into here in the future.
So right now, we have this function called handle KeyUp
and we'll go down to where our event listeners are.
And we'll just listen on the window.
And we'll listen for a keyUp and we'll pass it,
our handle keyUp function.
Now when I open it, hit my escape key,
you see that it works just fine.
Let's try this second gallery here,
make sure that's still working.
Beautiful, working really nicely.
Next thing we need to do is to hook up these buttons here
where you show the next and the previous images
either by clicking on them or by using the arrow keys.
So let's do the clicking of the buttons first.
So go down to where our event listeners are
and we'll grab our, let's do the next button
and we'll add an event listener to that of click.
And we'll make a new function called showNextImage.
Go back up here.
See what I mean about tons of these little functions?
It doesn't necessarily matter in which order
you put them in, I kinda like to group them together.
We'll say function, showNextImage and now,
what we need to know is what is the next image?
If I click on the backpack and I click on next,
it just shows me the suitcase.
So, that's why I made this image called let currentImage
and when we open up an image,
we set the currentImage to be that one.
Why?
Because now, when we run, showNextImage,
we should be able to know what is at least
the current image, so let's refresh it.
And I'll clear this out, when I click on next,
it tells me the current image
is a patagonia black hole, okay.
And if I were to wonder what is the next image,
I should just be able to say .nextElementSibling,
let's try that.
It gives me the suitcase.
Okay, I like it, I like it.
It is giving us an error here.
Cannot read property nextElementSibling of undefined.
And this is actually a problem that we run into
fairly frequently when we are trying to
listen to clicks on things in multiple instance.
So, in our case, what happens is that we are listening
for a click on the next button
and we're listening for a keyUp here.
And what's happening is that this is running twice
because I have two galleries and I have two event listeners
tacked on to the window, into the next button.
So what happened is it worked fine for the first instance,
for the second instance, errored out.
And that shouldn't be happening.
So what we need to do with these two add event listeners
is we need to bring them up to our open modal.
Event listeners to be bound when we open the modal.
And then we need to do the exact opposite,
sort of clean up when we close it.
So I'm gonna go and put that in there.
And we will, instead of add, we use removeEventListener.
And what that does is it makes sure
that we only ever are listening for keyUp and click
on these things once and then when we close the modal down,
we remove those event list as we sort of clean up
after ourselves, so we don't have these unnecessary
event listeners running on things
that aren't showing on the page.
So let's try that again.
Click on Patagonia next black hole.
Click on the next button, now it shows it to me.
And when I click outside of it, open it up again,
click next, it's still working
and it's not duplicating or anything like that.
It does show me this little red errors here
says it was used before it was defined.
In my book, that's totally fine to do that.
Why?
Because this isn't running on page load.
It's only running once this function is called
and by the time that runs,
this thing will have been defined.
If you wanna get rid of them,
you can rearrange the order
at which your things are in there.
So we have the next one showing up
by clicking showNextImage.
And all we need to do is instead of logging it,
we just pass it to show image.
And now, when I click on one and click the next one,
it'll automatically just change everything out to us
because we're passing reference to that image
to our Show image function.
And now, you'll probably see why we checked for,
if there was no image being passed in.
Because when you hit the next one and you click on this,
it shouldn't work because you hit the last one.
You could write some logic here, to say
if it's the last image, then, show the first one.
And I'm a little bit tempted, let's do it.
So, we'll say showNextImage, nextSibling
or gallery.firstElementChild, is that it?
Let's try.
(laughs)
So it wraps.
With just a little bit of extra word, it wraps around
and that could be a little option
you can make in your gallery.
Now, we're gonna do the back button.
So let's go through that whole song and dance again.
We can just duplicate this here.
And we'll say show previous image.
And we just make this prevElementSibling
or first, I think there's a lastElementChild.
And then we'll go in to our openModal
and hook this up, duplicate it to say the prev button
addEvenListener show prevImage, duplicate that,
and our close and we'll simply clean up
with removeEventListener.
Does that work?
If I click on this and click back.
Oh, that didn't work.
You know what's happening here is that
it's always wrapping around no matter what.
It's wrapping around.
So let's go back to our logic.
With the show previous image.
And this because the currentImage.prevElementSibling
is not a property, it's previous.
And now, it should go back to the blond chair
now, it should wrap around.
Beautiful, working really good.
Next step is to hook up the keys.
And in here, we can just sort of piggyback
on this handle key up because we're already
adding and removing our event listeners,
we can piggy back on that.
We'll say if event.key is equal to ArrowRight,
showNextImage and then if the event.key
is equal to arrowLeft, showPrevImage.
I'll open it up.
I'm gonna use my arrow keys now.
Works beautifully.
And that beautiful, how I like it.
One thing you could do here is just type return
in front of these and it's not actually returning any values
from here, but by adding that return
makes this function from stop running.
Because if it was escape, then there's no sense
in checking if it was arrow right or arrow left
because it was escape.
So by typing every turn in front of that
will stop that function from running
and stop you from unnecessarily checking
if it was arrow right or arrow left.
So it's a little bit of a bonus tip for you there.
Last thing we need to do with this little gallery
is the enter key.
So images, by default, are not keyboard focusable.
And in order to make this gallery accessible
to keyboard users, we need to ensure that
when they tab through it and they highlight
and when you hit enter, it opens it up.
So, what we've done is, if you go to the HTML here,
I've given them all a tab index of zero.
And by giving it a tab index of zero, you're telling
the browser, hey, just like you do with your inputs
and everything else that you can tab through,
links, things like that, also, when somebody's tabbing,
give me a shot.
And we don't give it a tab index value of anything,
we just give it a zero and that will allow it
to just naturally go in the flow of the document.
And if I were to go in between here,
I just have like a rogue input.
You see that it tabs through then we go to the input
and then we keep tabbing on through.
So that's the beauty of that.
So there's that and on some elements,
when you hit enter on them, they will trigger a click
like a button, but that is not the case for an image
that has a tab index added to it.
So, what we need to do, is we need to listen
for a keyUp or a keyDown event on the image
and check if the user had hit enter when it's focused.
So we'll go down to where our event listeners are.
And we'll take each of our images
and we'll loop over them again for each image.
You can do this in the same loop as the above one
but from my own standard, I say come in
and keep them separate.
Image.addEventListener will listen for a keyUp event.
And when that happens, we'll take the event
and check if it was an enter.
So we'll say if e.key is equal to enter,
then, we will showImage e.currentTarget.
Whoo.
So loop over each image.
Maybe we should comment that out.
Loop over each image.
Attach an event listener for each image.
And then when that is keyUped, check if it was enter
and if it was, show that image.
Hit enter, there it shows it to me.
I can still use my keyboards, hit escape, keep going,
hit enter, open it up, it's a very nice gallery.
And like, I know there's a lot going on here
but what we're at 91 lines for
a pretty full featured gallery, I think that is pretty cool.
Really, the only thing we're sort of missing is a bit
of an animation between a one and two
and that would probably add another
50 or 60 lines to the code.
So that is the base gallery, now we're gonna come back
and revisit this whole idea in coming videos
when we learn about prototypes.
Because one downside to this where we have openModal,
closeModal, having functions inside of this function
is that these functions are not actually shared
between the two galleries, they're just duplicated.
We're basically copy pasting these functions
and now we have double functions
that do the exact same thing.
So, when we learn about prototypes in classes,
we're gonna learn about how do we share this functionality
between galleries as well as open up this functionality
so we could call these functions manually ourselves,
or open them up to other developers
who want to maybe switch the image to the next one.
That's it for today.
Catch you in the next one.